ar
X
iv
:0
90
4.
21
10
v4
  [
ph
ys
ics
.so
c-p
h]
  1
1 M
ar 
20
10
Citation graph, weighted impact factors and performance indices
Karol Z˙yczkowski1,2
1“Mark Kac” Complex Systems Research Centre, Institute of Physics,
Jagiellonian University, ul. Reymonta 4, 30-059 Krako´w, Poland and
2Centrum Fizyki Teoretycznej, Polska Akademia Nauk, Al. Lotniko´w 32/44, 02-668 Warszawa, Poland
(Dated: March 11, 2010)
A scheme of evaluating an impact of a given scientific paper based on importance of papers
quoting it is investigated. Introducing a weight of a given citation, dependent on the previous
scientific achievements of the author of the citing paper, we define the weighting factor of a given
scientist. Technically the weighting factors are defined by the components of the normalized leading
eigenvector of the matrix describing the citation graph. The weighting factor of a given scientist,
reflecting the scientific output of other researchers quoting his work, allows us to define weighted
number of citation of a given paper, weighted impact factor of a journal and weighted Hirsch index
of an individual scientist or of an entire scientific institution.
I. INTRODUCTION
Any given scientist is a good scientist if he is considered
to be good by a representative group of other good scien-
tists. Such a simple way of evaluating quality of scientific
achievements could be useful two hundred years ago, as
the number of scientists was small and a respectable re-
searcher was competent to evaluate the progress in a huge
field of science.
Nowadays such an approach is no longer realistic. As
the number of universities, scientists, journals and sci-
entific articles keeps growing fast, one is often forced to
use some parametric measures to characterize the out-
put of a given scientist. Although the peer review is still
considered to be the most reliable and objective method
of evaluation of candidates for any scientific position, in
view of a large number of applicants in the preliminary
phase one often performs screening of numerical values of
performance indices, designed to quantify scientific out-
put of the candidates.
As the status of scientific citations among researchers
is rather ambivalent [1], we do not claim that citations
of scientific articles directly indicate their quality and
importance. Just on contrary, we share some doubts,
often raised in the literature [2, 3] that trying to mea-
sure scientific achievements by any index based on the
number of citations may generate certain perverse effects:
researchers no longer focus on interesting and relevant re-
search, but they try to adapt to the popular evaluation
criteria. However, looking around we have to agree that
various citation indices are used nowdays to evaluate sci-
entists, journals or research institutions.
Thus in this work we shall not discuss a controversial
issue, what is the optimal measure of scientific achieve-
ment. Instead we review common quantitative measures
of scientific quality and discuss possible ways to improve
them. The most popular indices used to evaluate the im-
pact of a given article, the influence of a scientific journal
for the research community, the scientific output of a sin-
gle individual or entire institution are based only on the
quantity of citations in the literature to the articles ana-
lyzed. Our aim is to take into account also the quality of
the citations, measured by the averaged achievements of
the authors of the papers which refer to the article under
consideration.
Additional motivation for our research is due to the
controversy concerning the usage of the impact factor
(IF) [4, 5], to quantify the quality of a scientific journal.
On one hand it was pointed out [6] that impact factor of
a given journal can be manipulated by the editors and
publisher. On the other hand it was often emphasized
that the two year window for counting the citations of
the papers analyzed is perhaps fine for biology, medicine
and some other branches of science, it is rather not the
case e.g. for mathematical journals. These journals score
small values of the impact factor, since the preparation
of a mathematical article and the entire refereeing proce-
dure takes often more time than two years. Furthermore,
in several branches of science great role is played by arti-
cles which are not quickly forgotten. Thus one could also
design and work with an impact factor, which takes into
account only citations gathered three or five years after
paper was published [3].
In order to identify the papers which contribute most
to the IF of a journal the editors often try to identify
articles, which gained the largest number of citations in
the first and the second year after the year they were
published. Editors of some mathematically oriented jour-
nals, analyzing a list of articles prepared in this way for
their journal were concerned, if it really represents the
most important articles published. In fact they consid-
ered that several papers of not the top quality entered
this list, only because they were simple enough that they
could become understood and later quoted by other au-
thors of recent papers of a mediocre quality.
On the other hand, in is also believed that in several
fields of science the impact factor could be artificially in-
flated by a number of papers of lesser quality, the authors
of which tend to quote several recent articles not directly
related to their work. The aim of this practice is to please
the editor (if the paper cited was published in the same
journal), or to suggest the referees that the author fol-
lows the recent literature and in this way to improve the
chances that their work will be published.
2To take these features into account one needs then to
distinguish, in a statistical sense, the quality of a given ci-
tation. In short, any citation of an established scientist,
whose numerous papers have already attracted several
citations, should be weighted more than a citation by a
newcomer to the field. In this paper we suggest a pos-
sible solution of this problem by defining the weight of
a scientific citation and using this notion to modify and
improve performance indices defined earlier in [5, 7, 8].
All indices proposed are based on the weighting factor,
associated to each scientists, which is analogous to the
Page Rank introduced by Brin and Page [9] to character-
ize relative importance of various web pages and used in
the Google web search engine. The weights defined by the
components of the leading eigenvector of a suitably de-
fined citation matrix characterize a given citation. These
numbers display the desired property of self-consistence:
the weight of any citation by a given researcher is larger,
if his papers are quoted by other scientists, whose papers
are often quoted.
A similar idea was recently applied for study of the
citation graph created for publications in the Physical
Review family of journals [10], for the graph in the field
of biochemistry and molecular biology [11], and indepen-
dently put forward in recent lectures of Nielsen [12], who
considered the idea to use the Page Rank algorithm to
order individual scientific papers according to their cita-
tion graphs. The same algorithm was used to design the
Eigenfactor web tool, which takes into account the cita-
tion graph to evaluate a proposed measure of the relative
importance of scientific journals [13]. While any node of
the graph represents a single article in the former ap-
proach or an entire journal in the latter scheme, in this
work it will be associated with an individual scientist.
II. CITATION MATRIX AND WEIGHTING
FACTORS
Consider a sample of N authors of numerous scien-
tific articles, in which they usually refer to their previous
achievements, but also quote papers of some other scien-
tists. Let us assume for a while that all papers consid-
ered are written by a single author only - this simplifying
assumption will be relaxed later in this section. Each sci-
entist can be thus associated with a vertex of a graph,
while any citation in any paper forms a directed link be-
tween two vertexes – see e.g. [14]. Define a square matrix
C of size N , such that
a) Cij is equal to the number of times the scientist ”j”
quoted a single paper of his colleague ”i”.
b) Cii = 0, for i = 1, . . . , N , hence all self-citations are
neglected.
Observe that this citation matrix C is likely not to
be symmetric. However, matrix C is by construction
real and it contains non-negative entries only. Therefore
it fulfills the assumptions of the celebrated Frobenius–
Perron (FP) theorem (see e.g. [15, 16] ). This implies
that
i) there exists an eigenvalue z1 = λ with the largest
absolute value which is real and non-negative,
ii) the entire spectrum {zi}Ni=1 of C belongs to the disk
of radius equal to λ,
iii) the eigenspace associated with λ contains a real
eigenstate ~x = {x1, . . . xN}, such that all its components
are non-negative.
Since we do not force citation matrix C to be stochas-
tic, the leading eigenvalue λ needs not to be equal to
unity. However, we will assume here that the graph an-
alyzed is connected. Then the leading eigenvalue λ is
non-degenerate, and there exists a unique vector ~x such
that
Cx = λx. (1)
This leading eigenvector can be normalized as
Wi := N
xi∑N
j=1 xj
, (2)
which implies that the mean entry is equal to unity,
〈Wi〉i = 1.
In this way for a given scientist i one can associate an
weighting factor Wi. Such a factor depends not only on
total number of times his papers were quoted by other
scientists, Ti :=
∑N
j=1 Cij , but also on the fact who re-
ferred to his work. However, such a number should not
be treated as an optimal number used to quantify the sci-
entific achievement of a researcher. It is more informative
then the bare number Ti of total citations, but it shares
similar disadvantages. For instance, as emphasized by
Hirsch [8], the total number of citations can be inflated
by single non representative papers, and it overweights
highly quoted review articles versus original research pa-
pers. On the other hand the weighting factors Wi allow
us to define other more suitable indices and parameters.
Before proceeding we need to adjust the definition of C
and its eigenvector ~x, to make it directly applicable to
the problem.
A. Scientific papers with several authors
Any citation to a single author paper published in
an article written by another single author can be in-
terpreted as a unit flow between the corresponding two
vertexes. Thus the number
L =
∑
ij
Cij (3)
represents the number of unit links in the graph, equal
to the total number of citations (with auto citations ex-
cluded).
In practice, the papers are often written by several
authors, so it is natural to split this coupling uniformly
among all the authors involved in such a way that the
3sum of the weights for each citation is equal to unity.
To this end, consider the process of forming a graph by
taking into account one article after another, and in each
case scanning through all its references.
Assume that a paper with M authors defined by the
set of indices, J = {j1, . . . , jM} quotes another paper by
K authors, described by the set I = {i1, . . . , iK}. Any
quotation contributes to the citation matrix according to
two rules:
a’) if I ∩J = {∅} then Cij → Cij + 1KM for all pairs of
indices i, j such that i ∈ I and j ∈ J . In words, an inde-
pendent citation is taken into account and normalized in
such a way that the number L defined by (3) grows by
one.
b’) if I∩J 6= {∅} then C → C; the citation matrix does
not change since one does not want to analyze dependent
citations,
Observe that in the case of all papers written by single
author the rules a’) and b’) reduce to the rules a) and b)
discussed before.
Let us emphasize that the assumptions a) and a’) imply
that all quantities considered further do not depend on
self citations and dependent citations, which are known
to influence bibliometric indices [17–21]. Alternatively,
one could neglect all auto citations but take into account
the dependent citations and attribute to them the weight
smaller than this characterizing independent citations.
B. Truncated citation graph
In practice it is hardly doable to take into account all
the scientist into the consideration. Even if one could
aim to make the graph as complete as possible, its trun-
cation at some stage seems inevitable. In any realistic
case the citation graph will describe a finite set of N re-
searchers and take into account a given number of their
papers and the cumulative list of all the references. This
list of citations will likely include references to the pa-
pers written by authors not belonging to the analyzed
set of scientists. To take into account the fact that pa-
pers written by the researcher represented by i-th vertex
of the graph are cited by authors outside the graph we
suggest to extend the citation matrix by an extra row
and extra column, which jointly represents all truncated
vertexes. The additional entries read,
c) Ci,N+1 is equal to the total number of times, the
papers of scientist ”i” were quoted by all authors outside
the graph (not belonging to the analyzed set),
d) CN+1,i :=
1
N
∑N
k=1 Cki for i = 1, . . . , N . This as-
sumption is made to attribute a well balanced, average
weight to all external citations. To be consistent with
the rule b) we will also set
e) CN+1,N+1 = 0.
Note that the last, fictitious, vertex of the graph has no
direct meaning, since it only represents the world outside
the graph. The eigenvector x of the augmented matrix
has N + 1 components, but only first N of them have
the meaning of the weighting factors for N individuals.
Therefore its last component xN+1 can be neglected, and
in the normalization scheme which eventually produces
the vector ~W of size N the same rescaling (2) can be
used.
III. WEIGHTED PERFORMANCE INDICES
A. Weighted number of citations
After constructing the complete citation matrix C or
its approximation obtained according to the rules speci-
fied above, we find its normalized leading vector and nor-
malize it as in (2) to obtain the vector of the weighting
factors Wi, i = 1, . . . , N . Spectra and leading eigenvec-
tors of some exemplary graph matrices are discussed in
Appendix A, while the issue of uniqueness of the vector
corresponding to the leading eigenvalue is discussed in
Appendix B. For any scientific article A one may find
in an appropriate date base the number of times it was
quoted by all other scientific papers in the literature. De-
noting this number by c(A) we are now in position to
define the weighted number of quotations,
w(A) :=
c(A)∑
j=1
Wj , (4)
where Wj denotes the weighting factor of the j-th au-
thor quoting the paper A. For consistency we are not
going to include into this sum any auto citations. In a
more general case of papers written by several authors
it is natural to take the average weight of these authors.
Therefore we write
w(A) :=
c(A)∑
j=1
1
nj
nj∑
µ=1
Wjµ , (5)
where c(A) represents the number of independent quo-
tations of the paper A, while nj denotes the number of
authors of the j-th paper quoting A, and Wjµ is the
weighting index of the µ-th co–author of this paper.
B. Weighted impact factor of a journal
Let Zy denotes the number of papers published by a
certain scientific journal J in year y. To quantify the
impact the journal exerts for the scientific community one
often uses the so called impact factor. To compute it one
takes all Zy−2+Zy−1 articles published one or two years
earlier, and then sums the number of citations c(Aj), a
given article from this set received during the year y. The
result has then to be normalized with respect to the total
number of articles published in journal J during the two
4year time span [4, 5],
IF2y(J) :=
1
Zy−2 + Zy−1
Zy−2+Zy−1∑
j=1
c(Aj) . (6)
This commonly used index takes into account the two
year time window, so we shall denote it by IF2.
By construction this quantity takes into account only
the quantity of the citations received by articles pub-
lished in a given journal during last two years but not
their quality. Presented approach allows us to take into
consideration the fact, who quoted the papers analyzed.
In full analogy to (6) we thus define the weighted impact
factor (WIF2) of a journal J ,
WIF2y(J) :=
1
Zy−2 + Zy−1
Zy−2+Zy−1∑
j=1
w(Aj) . (7)
The only difference is that instead of counting the bare
numbers of citation c(Aj) of a given article Aj , we now
sum the weighted citations w(Aj). Since these number
reflects in a sense the quality of a citation we tend to
believe that the weighted impact factor forms a more
accurate quantity to evaluate the quality of a scientific
journal than the standard IF.
As mentioned in the introduction in some disciplines
like mathematics and mathematical physics the process
of preparing an article and publishing it is often longer
than the two year time span used in the definition of
IF2. Therefore one may propose [2] to use also similar
quantities defined for a longer time window containing
five years. In full analogy to the previous definitions we
write
IF5y(J) :=
1
m
m∑
j=1
c(Aj) where m =
5∑
i=1
Zy−i (8)
and
WIF5y(J) :=
1
m
m∑
j=1
w(Aj) . (9)
Here one takes into account all articles published in the
five year time span, while c(Aj) and w(Aj) denote now
the number of all citations and the sum of weighted cita-
tions, a given paper Aj from this sample obtained in the
analyzed year y. The 5–year impact factor could be spe-
cially useful to characterize mathematical journals and
journals devoted to these fields of science, in which the
papers are produced in a slower pace, and the citations
half–life is longer, since after a few years the articles do
not become obsolete.
C. Weighted impact factor of a paper
Since the distribution of citations is known to be skew
[2, 22, 23] the providing the average number of citations
only is by far not sufficient to characterize the entire dis-
tribution. Hence it is not possible to use the impact fac-
tor of a journal as an estimated. number of the citation a
typical paper published there will obtain during the next
two years. Moreover, es explicitly emphasized by Seglen
[22], the number of citation obtained by a given article
is not influenced by the impact factor of the journal, in
which it appeared.
To make any reasonable evaluation of the impact a
given article had on the scientific community, one can
analyze its contribution to the impact factor of the jour-
nal. To this end we define the impact factor of an article
A published in year y is a sum of citations gained in the
next two years,
AIF2y(A) := cy+1(A) + cy+2(A) , (10)
since only this citations contribute to the impact factor
IF2. Here cy(A) denotes the number of times the paper
A was quoted during year y. Note that the article impact
factor (AIF2) can be only defined only for articles pub-
lished more than two years ago. In view of the statistical
properties of the citation distribution it is clear therefore
that for any paper older then two years this very quan-
tity has to be used to describe its impact on the field,
instead of the IF of the journal it was published. In a
similar manner, for papers older than five years one can
also define the five years impact factor (AIF5).
To take also into account the quality of each citation
we can use of the weights wy introduced in the previ-
ous section and define the weighted article impact factor
(WAIF2)
WAIF2y(A) := wy+1(A) + wy+2(A) , (11)
where wy(A) denotes the sum of the weighted citations
the paper A defined as in (5) for citations gained during
the year y. By construction this notion is applicable to
articles published at least two years earlier.
D. Weighted Hirsch index
To quantify a scientific research output of a given re-
searcher one often uses the h index introduced by Hirsch
[8]. For a given scientists this index is equal to h, if h of
all papers he has written were quoted at least h times.
Ordering his articles according to the number of citations
c(Ai), the article Ai has ever received one can write
h := max k : c(Ak) ≥ k . (12)
Although the h index gained considerable popularity
and it became a subject of several research papers [19,
24–26], several of its drawbacks were emphasized [2, 3].
As in the case of the impact factor the Hirsch index is not
capable to differentiate between relevant and less relevant
citations.
5Making use of the weighted citation number w(Ai) of
an article, we may thus introduce the weighted h index
w := w(Ak) (13)
where k is the maximal integer such that w(Ak) ≥ k.
This index enjoys all the virtues of the original h in-
dex recently emphasized in [24, 25], but additionally it
takes into account scientific achievements of the authors
quoting the work of the evaluated individual. Since the
weights w(Ai) determined by the citation graph take into
account the number of authors of the paper, the weighted
index w does not suffer a crucial drawback [3] of the orig-
inal Hirsch index, in which a paper with a hundred co–
authors is treated in the same way as an article written
by a single scientist. Furthermore, the weights w are in
general given by real numbers, so the index w may admit
non-integer numbers. Thus this quantity provides us a
finer differentiation of the group analyzed than the index
h, which is integer by definition.
A possibility to use the h-index to quantify scientific
production of an entire institution was recently advo-
cated in [27]. Hence one can use the weighted index w
for this purpose. Furthermore, following Schubert [28]
one can easily adopt his idea of successive performance
indices and define an analogue to the index h2. To be
concrete, the weighted successive index w2 of a scientific
institution is equal to an integer number w, if it employs
w scientists, such that the weighted Hirsch index w(i) for
each of them is equal to or larger than w2.
E. Weighted efficiency index
Let us emphasize here that one should not directly
compare the Hirsch indices for scientists working in dif-
ferent research fields. This is due to the fact that the
numbers of papers and citations vary from one scientific
field to another [2, 29, 30], so the means values of Hirsch
indices also do differ. On one hand one could compare the
values of the indices rescaled against the average value
in a given field [23]. On the other hand, one may work
with other indicators which reflect citing patterns of each
community.
As an example of such a quantity one consider the
number of ’known papers’ produced by a given re-
searcher. Defining the known paper as an article quoted
more times then the number of references cited in it, we
see that this notion by construction takes into account
the citation habits of a given field.
To set a simple normalization scale useful for compari-
son of citations gained by articles from various disciplines
Plomp [7] introduced the efficiency of a given paper. It
is defined by a ratio,
E(A) =
c(A)
r(A)
, (14)
where c(A) denotes the number of citations gained, while
r(A) is equal to the number of articles quoted in work A.
In such a way various citation habits, different in differ-
ent fields of science are automatically taken into account.
Moreover, the role of a single citation of a review paper
seems to be adequate, since a good review may attract
a lot of citations, but its list of references is usually also
long.
In a loose analogy to the Hirsch index, we can define an
efficiency index, (e-index), which quantifies the research
output of a given researcher,
e := max k : E(Ak) ≥ 1 . (15)
In other words, for a given author we count the num-
ber of his scientific papers, which belong to the class of
’known papers’ - they have gained more citations, than
the number of items in the list of references in this article.
In spirit of this work we may improve this quantity and
define the weighted efficiency index
e′ := max k : w(Ak) ≥ r(Ak) . (16)
Now we count the number of articles for which the
weighted number of citations w is larger or equal to the
total number of references r. Such an index is perhaps
not as sophisticated as the Hirsch index, but its values
are by construction less dependent on the working habits
in a given scientific discipline.
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Analyzing the entire citation graph and citation ma-
trix one can obtain a weighting factors which quantify the
total impact of a single researcher for the scientific litera-
ture. It will be interesting to analyze statistical distribu-
tion of weighting factors for the citation graph represent-
ing the entire scientific literature and certain particular
branches of science. An empirical study of papers on high
energy physics [31, 32] and computer science [14] reveals
that the probability P (k) that a given article is cited k
times, decays according to a power law, P (k) ∼ k−a. A
power law distribution of the weighting factors attributed
to individual scientific papers on molecular biology and
biochemistry was recently reported by Ma et al. [11].
Thus one could verify, whether a similar behavior will be
observed for the distribution of weighting factors charac-
terizing the group of scientists working in a given field.
The weighting factors attributed to a given scientist are
useful to introduce further bibliometric quantities. For a
given article one defines its weighted number of citations,
for a journal its weighted impact factor and for a given
scientists the w index, i.e. his weighted Hirsch index.
Analogous quantities can be introduced for groups of
researchers or entire scientific institutions, but their nor-
malization and interpretation has to be performed with
a certain caution [27]. Similarly, cumulative w indices
can be used for various scientific fields and sub-fields just
to identify so called ’hot topics’ [33]. The usage of the
weighted indices in all these cases could be superior with
6respect to the standard quantities in a sense that the ap-
proach proposed takes into account the average quality
of the citations of scientific articles.
However, it should be emphasized explicitly that the
computation of weighted scientometric indices is it not
entirely straightforward and for any practical purpose
one needs to cope with several technical problems. For
instance one has to deal with different authors with iden-
tical names, with scientists who change their name during
their career and with scientists whose name was tran-
scribed into Latin in several different ways. In general
one might think that such cases do not occur very often
[34], so they should not induce statistically significant ef-
fects for the weighted indices of all other authors, but
these important problems definitely require further stud-
ies. Some remarks on selection of bibliometric data and
other practical issues are provided in Appendix B.
We shall now pass to some more general remarks. Al-
though we tend to agree that the existing bibliometric
indices can be further developed and improved, we do
not claim there exists a single number capable to quan-
tify scientific achievement in an unambiguous way. On
the other hand, one should not neglect the possibility of
making a wise use of the bibliometric data and various
impact factors. Let us quote however, an opinion of Adler
et al. [2], ”While it is incorrect to say that the impact
factor gives no information about individual papers in a
journal, the information is surprisingly vague and can be
dramatically misleading”.
Similarly, any bibliometric data should not play the de-
cisive role during any peer review process. For instance,
working with applications for Advanced Grants of Eu-
ropean Research Council (ERC) the panels of experts
tried hard to evaluate the quality of the projects and
the scientific achievements of the principal investigator,
not putting too much attention to their scientometric in-
dices. However, an a posteriori statistical analysis found
a clear correlation [35] between the final outcome of the
2008 grant competition in PE-2 panel and the bibliomet-
ric benchmark suggested by ERC and used in the propos-
als: the total number of citations of ten papers chosen
by each applicant from his list of publications for the last
decade.
Let us then conclude this article with some concrete
comments concerning the practical usage of scientometric
data. They will be separately addressed to three groups
of readers.
a) Scientists. Do well your research, write good pa-
pers and try to publish them in good scientific journals.
Writing your articles cite these papers which should be
quoted, according to the established habits in your field.
Do not care too much about various impact factors and
indices. Any good scientist will have sound numbers with
respect to any (reasonable) measure and scientometric in-
dicator. Do not waste your time and energy for a silly
game to inflate artificially the values of the scientomet-
ric indices, which might be used to characterize your re-
search output.
b) Reviewers. Scientists involved in all kind of eval-
uation should make use of their knowledge of the field
and do not treat the bibliometric data as a definite an-
swer to any question. During the peer review process
all scientometric indicators should be considered as aux-
iliary data only. In a need to characterize the impact
of a given article published more then three years ago
one should use the number of citations gained instead of
the impact factor of the journal it was published. Fur-
thermore, the bibliometric indicators should always be
normalized against the average computed for scientists
working in the similar field of science and in the corre-
sponding period of time.
c) Managers of science. Scientific activity has mul-
tiple goals, so try to avoid harsh consequences of the pro-
jection of a multidimensional system onto a single axis.
Do not hope therefore for a unique scientometric indica-
tor, which could be widely used as a universal evaluation
tool. Each bibliometric index has certain advantages and
some drawbacks, but using several of them in parallel re-
duces the risk of manipulating the data. Support versa-
tile usage of scientometry, in which the researcher under
evaluation takes active part. For instance, consider the
benchmarks used by applicants for the ERC grants: Any
senior researcher selects his ten best papers published in
the last decade and provides the number each of them
was cited. A junior scientist has to choose his best five
papers published during the recent five years.
To summarize, it is not fair to say that the bibliometric
data carry no valuable information whatsoever. However,
it is not as simple to decode from them a piece of relevant
information, as it may look like at a first glance. Thus
we would not to discourage from usage of scientometric
data, provided they are used in a wise and reasonable
way.
Note added. After the first version of this work was
completed a new paper by Radicchi et al. was posted
in the web and later published [36]. The authors of this
article put forward a similar idea to apply the PageR-
ank algorithm to the citation graph, in which each ver-
tex represents an individual author. Working with the
set of data composed of the collection of the Physical
Review journals published between 1893 and 2006 they
concluded that the numerical values of the weighted indi-
cator obtained in this way for several physicists correlates
well with their scientific achievements measured by some
of the main prizes in physics, which include Nobel prize,
Boltzmann medal, Wolf prize, Dirac medal and Planck
medal.
It is a pleasure to thank P. Bia las, W. Burkot,
G. Haran´czyk, M. Kus´ and W. S lomczyn´ski for helpful
discussions and C. M. Bender for fruitful correspondence.
This work was performed during the author’s spare time
and was not supported by any funding agency.
7Appendix A: Some exemplary graph matrices and
their leading eigenvectors
In this appendix we provide examples of some simple
matrices and analyze properties of their leading eigenvec-
tor. Although a matrix of a small size N directly repre-
sents only a small citation graph which describes a small
group of N scientists, it can be also applied to model a
huge graph with a sub–graph structure: each vertex may
represent a given field or subfield of science. Therefore
studying even such oversimplified cases can be helpful in
understanding the properties of the connectivity matrix
of a citation graph and its leading eigenvector.
Let us start with the simplest case of N = 2,
C2 =
[
0 a
b 0
]
, x =
[ √
a√
b
]
. (A1)
The leading eigenvalue reads λ =
√
ab, and in this case
the weights xi given be the corresponding eigenvector are
proportional to the square root of the flow between the
vertexes. Obviously this is not longer the case for larger
graphs,
C3 =

 0 a 00 0 b
c 0 0

 , x =

 a
2/3b1/3
b2/3c1/3
a1/3c2/3

 . (A2)
The following numerical example shows that the weights
given by the leading eigenvector grow slower than linearly
with the average entry in each row,
C4 =


0 1 1 1
2 0 2 2
3 3 0 3
4 4 4 0

 , x ≈


0.3223
0.5738
0.7755
0.9409

 . (A3)
Consider now some other numerical examples of size
four
C =


0 4 0 0
6 0 2 1
0 0 0 0
0 0 3 0

 , x ≈


0.6325
0.7746
0
0

 . (A4)
Observe that quotations by authors, the papers of
which were never cited do not contribute at all to the
weighting index!
C =


0 6 6 6
2 0 1 1
0 1 0 1
1 0 1 0

 , x ≈


0.8975
0.4228
0.1247
0.2036

 . (A5)
Similarly, quotation by a junior scientist, the papers of
which received a little attention of the scientific commu-
nity, are much less important than a citation by an ac-
complished author. This is seen by comparing the third
and the fourth component of the eigenvector of the above
citation matrix, in which the first two rows represent a
renowed researcher and a less experienced author, respec-
tively.
It is illustrative to analyze the case of two weakly con-
nected subgraphs, represented below by the first and the
second pair of nodes. If the coupling between the sub-
graphs is symmetric, C2,4 = C4,2 the leading eigenvector
lives in both subspaces,
C =


0 4 0 0
6 0 0 1
0 0 0 4
0 1 6 0

 , x ≈


0.4197
0.5691
0.4197
0.5691

 , (A6)
However, if there is more fluxes between both subgraphs
start to differentiate, the weight of the leading vector
moves toward the distinguished subsystem,
C =


0 4 0 0
6 0 0 1
0 0 0 4
0 0.5 6 0

 , x ≈


0.4939
0.6502
0.3493
0.4597

 , (A7)
C =


0 4 0 0
6 0 0 1
0 0 0 4
0 0.1 6 0

 , x ≈


0.5913
0.7480
0.1870
0.2365

 . (A8)
If two graphs are not connected, the leading eigenvalue
is degenerated and one finds a corresponding eigenvector
localized exclusively in the more populated subspace,
C =


0 4 0 0
6 0 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 3 0

 , x ≈


0.6325
0.7746
0
0

 . (A9)
To lift such a degeneracy one may modify the analyzed
matrix C by forming its convex combination with the flat
matrix S such that Sij = 1/N . In this way one assures [9]
that the leading eigenvector of C(p) = (1− p)C+ pS can
be obtained by iterating sufficiently long the flat vector
with all entries equal, wi = 1/N , by the matrix C(p).
Appendix B: Practical remarks on evaluating the
weighting vector
1. Selection of the data
The key issue by constructing the citation graph is an
access to a reliable data base containing the scientific lit-
erature. For instance one may rely on the data provided
by the ISI Web of Science, although some experts claim
that it is biased toward the scientific journals published
in English only and it does not cover uniformly the en-
tire literature. Alternatively one may chose to use some
publicly open web search engines, like Google Scholar.
In this case it is believed that Google does not cover sys-
tematically earlier scientific literature. Furthermore it
8is not clear how to set simple criteria, which web docu-
ments should be taken into account. On one hand one
might restrict the attention to the papers published by a
scientific journal, which is first found in an earlier com-
piled list of all sources accepted. On the other hand,
due to popularity of various web archives and preprint
depositories (like arxiv.org) one might also accept for-
mally unpublished preprints posted there. In such a case
a special care has to be taken in order to avoid double
counting the same article, first deposited in an archive,
and later published in a journal, often under a slightly
changed title.
2. Different fields of science
As illustrated with some simple matrix examples, if
two fields of science are not coupled by any cross-
citations, the leading vector describes only scientists
working in the larger field. Similarly, if two fields of sci-
ence are coupled only weakly by a few cross-citations, the
leading eigenvector tends to be localized in the subgraph
with more scientists, papers and citations, so the weight-
ing factors handicap researchers working in a less popular
subfield. The splitting of the entire graph into subgraphs
can be defined in an objective way by applying the recent
method of Newman [37] to find community structure in
the citation graph. Since it is well known that the cita-
tion patterns depend on the branch of science [29, 30],
one should rather analyze two subgraphs separately, or
renormalize the leading eigenvector separately for a given
subfield. This is consistent with a rather general ’rule
of thumb’: the bibliometric data should be normalized
against the average computed for scientists working in
the similar field of science in the corresponding window
of time [23].
3. Degeneracy in names
It might not be easy to distinguish papers written by
various scientist, who publish under the very same name
[34]. In principle one may try to distinguish them by the
scientific discipline, the affiliations and the time window
of their publishing activity, but is its unlikely to expect
that the success rate will tend to unity. On the other
hand, it is reasonable to conjecture that not distinguish-
ing between the scientists with the same name will not
impact much the weighting indices of all other researchers
in the graph, as the weights of the links will be taken as
the average.
4. Period of the scientific activity
It would be unwise to compare weighting indices of
two researchers in very different age or living in differ-
ent times. The number of universities, scientists, jour-
nals, papers and citations keeps growing fast. Hence one
should expect that a comparison of two scientists with
equally valuable accomplishments, whose scientific con-
tributions are already forgotten (and their papers are not
quoted any more), would reveal that the scientist active
more recently is characterized by a larger weighting fac-
tor.
5. Uniqueness of the leading eigenvector of the
citation matrix
A matrix C is called reducible if it can be transformed
by a permutation P into matrix with a zero block below
the diagonal, C′ = PCPT =
[
D1 Z
0 D2
]
, where D1 and
D2 are square matrices. In the opposite case the matrix
is called irreducible. The Frobenius-Perron theorem im-
plies that for any irreducible non-negative matrix C its
spectral gap is positive, γ := z1 − |z2| > 0, so the real
eigenvector ~x corresponding to the leading eigenvalue z1
is unique. The size of the spectral gap governs the speed
of the convergence of any initial vector iterated several
times by C to the invariant state ~x = C~x.
The initial citation matrix C analyzed in this paper
in principle could reducible, but due to numerous cross-
citations between various researchers and subfields this
possibility seems to be unlikely. Furthermore, the auxil-
iary (N + 1)-th node of the graph representing all scien-
tists outside the ensemble under investigation introduces
additional connectivity and hence increases (on average)
the spectral gap.
The size of the spectral gap for the graph matrix de-
scribing entire scientific literature has to be determined
in a numerical experiment. If the gap occurs to be too
small to ensure convergence time realistic for practical
implementations, one may always introduce a suitable
modification of the citation matrix C. For instance, fol-
lowing the original idea of Page Rank [9], one could mix
C with the flat matrix S such that Sij = 1/N – see also
[38, 39].
[1] D. W. Aksnes and A Rip, Researchers’ perceptions of
citations, Research Policy 38, 895-905 (2009).
[2] R. Adler, J. Ewing, P. Taylor, Citation Statistics, a re-
port IMU-ICIAM-IMS, November 2008,
[3] F. Laloe¨ and R. Mosseri, Not even right, not even wrong,
Europhysics News, 40/5 27-29 (2009).
[4] E. Garfield, Citation Indexing (Wiley, New York) (1979).
[5] E. Garfield, The impact factor, Current Contents 29 20
June 1994.
[6] M.E. Falafas and V.G. Alexiou, The top-ten in journal
9impact factor manipulations, Arch. Immunol. Theor Exp.
56, 223-226 (2008).
[7] R. Plomp, The highly cited papers of professors as an in-
dicator of a research group’s scientific performance, Sci-
entometrics 29, 377 (1994).
[8] J.E. Hirsch, An index to quantify an individual’s scien-
tific research output, PNAS 102 16569 (2005).
[9] S. Brin and L. Page, The anatomy of a large–scale hy-
pertextual Web search engine, Comp. Networks ISDN
Systems 30 107 (1998).
[10] P. Chen, H. Xie, S. Maslov and S. Redner, Find-
ing scientific gems with Google Pare Rank algorithm,
J.Informetrics 1, 8-15 (2007).
[11] N. Ma, J. Guan and Y. Zhao, Bringing Page Rank to the
citation analysis, Information Processing & Management
44, 800 (2008).
[12] M. A. Nielsen, Lectures on the Google Technology Stack,
December 2008, see http://michaelnielsen.org
[13] C. Bergstrom, Eigenfactor: Measuring the value and the
prestige of scholarly journals, C&RL News, 68, 5 (2007).
[14] Y. An, J. Janssen and E. E. Milios, Characterizing and
mining the citation graph of the computer science litera-
ture, Knowledge & Information Systems 6, 664 (2004).
[15] A. W. Marshall and I. Olkin, The Theory of Memoriza-
tion and Its Applications (Academic Press, New York,
1979)
[16] D. S. Bernstein, Matrix Mathematics, Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton (2005).
[17] D.W. Aksens, A marco-study of self–citations Sciento-
metrics 56, 235 (2003).
[18] W. Gla¨nzel, K. Debackere, B. Thijs, and A. Schubert, A
concise review on the role of author self-citations in in-
formation science, bibliometrics and science policy, Sci-
entometrics 67, 263-277 (2006)
[19] M. Schreiber, A case study of the Hirsch index for 26 non-
prominent physicists, Ann. Physik 16, 640-652 (2007).
[20] T. F. Frandsen, Journal self-citations - Analysing the JIF
mechanism, J. Informetrics 1, 47-58 (2007)
[21] J. H. Fowler and D. W. Aksnes, Does self-citation pay?
Scientometrics 72, 427-437 (2007).
[22] P.O. Seglen, Why the impact factor should not be used
for evaluating research BMJ 324, 497 (1997).
[23] F. Radicchi, S. Fortunato and C. Castellano, Universality
in citation distribution: towards an objective measure of
scientific impact, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 17268-
1727 (2008).
[24] W. Gla¨nzel, On h–index. A mathematical approach to a
new measure of publication activity and citation impact,
Scientometrics 67, 315 (2006).
[25] J.E. Hirsch, Does the h index have predictive power?
PNAS 104 19193 (2007).
[26] G. J. Woeginger, An axiomatic characterization of the
Hirsch index, Math. Soc. Sciences 56, 224 (2008).
[27] J.F. Molinari and A. Molinari, A new methodology
for rating scientific institutions,, Scientometrics 75, 163
(2008).
[28] A. Schubert, Successive h-indices, Scientometrics 70, 183
(2007).
[29] P.D. Batista, M.G. Campiteli, O.Kinouchi, and A.S.
Martinez, Is it possible to compare researchers with dif-
ferent scientific interest? Scientometrics 68, 179 (2006).
[30] B. M. Althouse, J. D. West, T. C. Bergstrom, and C. T.
Bergstrom, Differences in impact factor across fields and
over time, J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60 27-34 (2009).
[31] S. Redner, How popular is your paper? An empirical
study of the citation distribution, Eur. Phys. J. B 4,
131 (1998).
[32] S. Lehmann, B. E. Lautrup, A. D. Jackson, Citation Net-
works in High Energy Physics, Phys. Rev. E 68, 026113
(2003).
[33] M. G. Banks, An extension of the Hirsch index: Indexing
scientific topics and compounds, Scientometrics 69, 161
(2006).
[34] D.W. Aksens, When different persons have an identical
author name. How frequent are homonyms? JASIST 59,
838-841 (2008).
[35] K. Z˙yczkowski, How to get an ERC grant? Europhysics
News, 40/5, 27-29 (2009).
[36] F. Radicchi, S. Fortunato, B. Markines and A. Vespig-
nani, Diffusion of scientific credits and the ranking of
scientists, Phys. Rev. E 80, 056103 (2009).
[37] M. E. J. Newman, Finding community structure in net-
works using the eigenvectors of matrices, Phys. Rev. E
74, 036104 (2006).
[38] A.N. Langville and C.D. Meyer, A survey of eigenvector
methods for web information retrieval, SIAM Review 47
135 (2005).
[39] K. Bryan and T. Leise, The $ 25,000,000,000 eigenvector:
the linear algebra behind Google, SIAM Review 48 569
(2006).
